# Welcome to my Blog

This website is born from the will to make things, you will probably find a bit of everything, but the main topics I talk about are related to Information Technology (IT) and Veterinary Medicine.

This blog design is made by me, while all the content is converted from simple markdown text to HTML using pandoc.

## How did I make it?

I used to deploy my blog using the [Chirpy Theme](https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy) for [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/), but I found an interesting repository that shows how to create a webpage from markdown files at [montioo/pandoc-md2html-example](https://github.com/montioo/pandoc-md2html-example). In short, it uses a tool called [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) to make conversions from markdown to HTML. That's the starting point from this blog design.

That repository is rather raw in customization and features, so many of the implementations that you can see in my blog were made by me such as: Category selection, sidebar, the index page (like a feed for all posts), all the color choice, I've modified the post layout and I also made huge improvements to the core mechanism to generate the website itself, by adding several new variables, changes to the template itself, automatic structuring of different categories, which can be noted by an "Older" and "Newer" section at the end of each posts, similarly to Chirpy's Theme.

While the work with HTML, CSS and Shell scripting was made solely by me, while some other elements like JavaScript and Python scripting were done using the assistance of AI.

## How does it work?

I made the build process really simple by using [just](https://github.com/casey/just) (Just a command runner), which can build my whole blog with a simple command: `just all`.

Essentially it's going to run two distinct Shell scripts: `makeindex` and `build-pages`.

`makeindex`: This will generate both the master index and indexes for each sub directory within the `_posts` directory as a markdown file.
`build-pages`: This transforms all markdown files into a webpage, including the markdown files generated by the `makeindex` using the appropriate template files at `_templates`.

Markdown files must contain a frontmatter with these values: `title`, `date` (except for index files), `description` (except for index files) and `category`, where:

- `title`: Title of the post.
- `date`: In the format B-DD, YYYY (Jan 1, 2025).
- `description`: A brief description on the post content.
- `category`: Category name following the sub directories names in `_posts`.

These metadata are extracted on conversion, so they can be inserted in specific sections of each post, plus an extra of when each post was updated and what are the previous and next posts to them.

## Improvements

- [x] A unique look to the projects page.
- Lazy load content on index pages.
- Skip already compiled pages with no changes, by using `make` instead of `just`.

## License

This work is licensed under a
[Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License][cc-by].

[cc-by]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
